[MUSIC]
Data analysis in particle physics
can be much more sophisticated than
we looked before.
And we'll talk about it at
the third lecture in more details.
But for the moment, we have to
keep in mind that all measurements
physicists do come with
an uncertainty estimation.
For example, tracking algorithm that
finds muon from previous exercise
should be evaluated somehow before
we can pass some data through it.
And thanks to standard model we
can simulate very precise image
of particles flying around the detector.
At this slide, you'll see
the second half of data analysis.
So to access processing time and
amount of information that is audacity of
information that is available
on the single object and
there is a bottom of this
plot that shows a raw data.
And if you follow parabola to the right,
you follow the path that we
described previously from raw information
that the detector records we collect,
reconstructed points then tracks segments,
then track candidates and
vertices and
then the whole decays of certain kind.
But at the same time,
there are very strong
software and
modules that can be used to simulate every
step that happens on the detector
level and subatomic level.
Actually, there are event
generators that
produce signal like patterns and
then you can estimate what kind of
response you can get from the detector.
What would be energy deposition if
you see something like the signal,
and then you can go down
the level of abstraction until
the raw data ideally the representation
of the simulated event and
representation of real
event should be the same.
Of course it is not the case
like by 100% because
some processes are very
difficult to estimate and
simulate but still the picture shows that
there is a very great deal of software and
efforts put into
simulation of the physics.
So, all of the algorithms,
for example, tracking or
triggers are evaluated
on the simulated data.
And it is very important problem,
efficiently, and
accurately simulate physical process.
At the moment,
it takes roughly 80% of computational
power of computational greed that CERN
uses for data processing.
And roughly it is proportional to the
amount of data you're going to collect.
There is a big problem when
LHC is going to switch into
high luminosity mode when generation
of data will be tens much larger.
At this slide, I've just presented
traditional packages that are used for
simulation of various aspects
of particle interaction
like Nutrena interaction,
generic simulator for
processes called Pythia and
Geant that is used for
simulation of particles
interacting with matter.
It's not only used for
particle physics but it is applied
to variety of different cases.
But at the link below you can find
much more examples of such software.
And with this regard,
I would like to mention two
more additional challenges that
are relevant from the perspective of our
course that focuses on machine learning.
So the first one is speed-up
of simulation that can
take advantage of generative models based
on for example neural networks that can
work much,
much faster than traditional simulators.
And tuning of simulator parameters to
find the best combination of
parameters that makes simulator
produce the most accurate and
realistic pictures.
So those simulators are being
used outside of CERN already,
for example in medicine and
space technologies and
there are plenitude of other
technologies that has been
produced as a byproduct
of research at CERN.
Those cover of course internet and
World Wide Web, Muono-graphy,
aerospace, and
cryogenics ultra vacuum techniques,
medicine of course based on ion
radiotherapy and Hadron therapy.
So, there's a whole side that is dedicated
to technologies that has been born at CERN and
are now being applied to our
everyday life of humanity.
I'd like to conclude this lecture and
to stress once again what is
important from our perspective here.
The first thing is LHC is a massive
sub-elementary scale microscope.
And it allows to look into
our fascinating research area
that no other tool can give access to.
There is a substantial,
theoretical foundation
that offers pretty good explanation
of what we have seen so
far on particle-level physics,
but it is not complete yet.
Some pretty fascinating
phenomena are awaiting for
clarification and LHC allows to probe for
theory extensions and to see which theory
gives better explanation for those.
At the same time, there are plenty of
machine learning challenges that include
data analysis, surrogate model
optimization and experiment design
that are waiting for minds and
talents of data scientists to be solved.
I hope that homework and
challenges that are prepared for
this course will keep you engaged and
allow you to get the feeling
how machine learning can improve
things at fundamental research.
[MUSIC]